Data Provenance
===============

One of the goals of PyARPES is to allow for reproducible and easily
introspectable scientific analysis. It should be easy for an
experimenter to go back to prior analysis notebooks or to figure and
understand how it was made. Similarly, reproducible science requires
that *others* can do the same.

Even hygienic use of Jupyter notebooks is insufficient to achieve true
reproducible analysis because

1. Code can change
2. Data is mutable and a precise record of changes to data is not
   recorded
3. Finished analysis products like figures are not linked to analysis

PyARPES attempts to address these problems by maintaining a record of
actions performed on data including functions, software version, and
parameters, when you use the builtin analysis routines.

PyARPES also configures Jupyter and IPython to log all of your Jupyter
sessions to ``logs/{notebook-name}_{date}_{time}.log``. You can opt out
of this by using the ``LOGGING_ENABLED`` feature switch in
``arpes.config.CONFIG``.

This record is used to produce a lineage for the data involved in any
figure created using the PyARPES standard figures, or using the PyARPES
``savefig`` wrapper. Additionally, each element in this data provenance
record stores the most recent cells run inside an IPython or Jupyter
session, if available, in order to make available the outside-of-library
context for this item in the provenance.

PyARPES also provides tools that make it simple to record and maintain
data provenance for your analysis code.

Format for data provenance
--------------------------

You can use ``.S.history`` to obtain the data provenance for data you
work with in PyARPES. Provenance is available on ``xr.DataArray`` and
``xr.Dataset`` instances and takes a nested list format, with IDs used
for references.

.. figure:: _static/intro-provenance.png
   :alt: Example data provenance in PyARPES

   Example data provenance in PyARPES

Most analysis routines that consume and produce ``xarray`` based data
will update this provenance record.

Here we can see that converting to momentum space includes a new item
indicating the conversion.

.. figure:: _static/kspace-provenance.png
   :alt: Example data provenance in PyARPES

   Example data provenance in PyARPES

Outputting provenance when plotting
-----------------------------------

After you’ve performed some analysis, you will want to produce plots,
and you will want the provenance to stick around with the figure.

The built-in plotting scripts in PyARPES will save both the output
figure, and a record of the data provenance.

.. figure:: _static/plotting-builtin-provenance.png
   :alt: Example data provenance in PyARPES

   Example data provenance in PyARPES

As an example, here we plot an ARPES cut: the figure is saved as
“example.png”, while the provenance for the data in the figure is
recorded in the file “example.png.provenance.json”.

After plotting, the provenance file contains:

.. code:: json

   {
     "VERSION": "2.0.0",
     "args": [
       {
         "version": "2.0.0",
         "record": {
           "what": "Loaded MC dataset from FITS.",
           "by": "load_MC"
         },
         "time": "2019-08-04T21:20:25.631022",
         "file": "/Users/chstansbury/PycharmProjects/python-arpes/resources/example_data/main_chamber_cut_0.fits"
       }
     ],
     "kwargs": {},
     "time": "2019-08-04T21:43:39.581877",
     "name": "fancy_dispersion"
   }

Custom plots
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Often you need to customize or write a one off plot. If instead of using
Matplotlib’s ``savefig`` you use ``arpes.plotting.savefig``, then the
``data=`` parameter allows you to request a provenance record for data
in your custom plot.

.. figure:: _static/manual-savefig-provenance.png
   :alt: Example data provenance in PyARPES

   Example data provenance in PyARPES

This records a provenance more or less identical to the previous
example.

Using provenance in your code
-----------------------------

PyARPES makes it very straightforward to opt into recording provenance.
If you write an analysis function, the simplest option is to use the
``update_provenance`` decorator, which introspects data passed to and
returned from your function at runtime and updates provenance
appropriately.

Additionally, because PyARPES includes recent Juypyter cell evaluations
in the record, you shouldn’t find the need to be very defensive in your
use of manual provenance tracking, although you should wrap code that
forms part of your more permanent analysis repetoire.

.. figure:: _static/decorator-provenance.png
   :alt: Example data provenance in PyARPES

   Example data provenance in PyARPES

If you need more control, you can also manually modify the provenance
record

.. figure:: _static/manually-applying-provenance.png
   :alt: Example data provenance in PyARPES

   Example data provenance in PyARPES
