.. _stack-plots:

Stack Plots
===========

Stacked line plots, typically used to highlight some change in a
lineshape as a function of an experimental degree of freedom or to
better present the dispersion of a band, are among the most bread and
butter of ARPES figures.

Because of their ubiquity, PyARPES offers two principal styles,
differing in whether the lines are shifted and stacked, or all aligned
but with varying color (often better for highlighting lineshape or gap
change).

Traditional stack plots
-----------------------

You can get a stack plot with ``arpes.plotting.stack_dispersion_plot``.
The scale can be adjusted with ``scale_factor=``, and the axis along
which the data is stacked can be controlled with ``stack_axis=``. Here
we will use the temperature dependent EDCs at the Fermi momentum from
our curve fitting explorations.

.. figure:: _static/stack-plot.png
   :alt: A traditional stack plot

   A traditional stack plot

To change the alignment characteristics to something more reasonable, we
can request a constant offset, and snap the right side of the lines to
the appropriate shift values.

.. figure:: _static/stack-plot-right-align.png
   :alt: A right-aligned traditional stack plot

   A right-aligned traditional stack plot

“Flat” stack plots
------------------

In addition to actually stacked line plots, we can opt to differentiate
the lines by color while keeping them overlapped. This can be
accomplished by ``arpes.plotting.flat_stack_plot``, which acts very
similar to the above.

.. figure:: _static/flat-stack.png
   :alt: A flat stack plot

   A flat stack plot

Although PyARPES will attempt to make a reasonable default guess for the
colorscale, here identifying that the stack axis is along the
experimental temperature and giving a colorbar from 0K to room
temperature, we can also control the colorbar and plot them onto custom
axes with ``cbarmap=``. Utilities for colorbars are
:doc:`discussed later <plotting-utilities>`.

.. figure:: _static/flat-stack-colorbar.png
   :alt: A flat stack plot with custom colorbar

   A flat stack plot with custom colorbar

Finally, as an example of how you might use the code in a real
situation, we can do some preprocessing of the data before creating the
figure. Here we subract and normalize by the low temperature data, which
highlights the Fermi edge width changing.

.. figure:: _static/flat-stack-difference.png
   :alt: A flat stack plot with custom colorbar and data preprocessing

   A flat stack plot with custom colorbar and data preprocessing
